# Dan Dale - Professor of Physics and Nuclear Engineering

Dan Dale is an experimental nuclear physicist with interests ranging from applied physics to experimental tests of quantum chromodynamics. His current projects are:

- Two neutron correlations in photo-fission. Here, we are studying the energy and angle correlations of neutrons emitted in the photo-fission of actinides. These correlations arise from the fact that neutrons emitted in fission come from fully accelerated fission fragments, and thus receive a kinematic boost. This work is funded by the US National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) Office of Proliferation Detection.
- Prompt diagnostic signatures of nuclear detonations: the production and transmission of Teller light. In a nuclear detonation, fission gamma rays are emitted from the assembly before the shock wave and fireball form. These gamma rays, which are in the energy range of a couple of MeV, Compton scatter off of electrons in air molecules and cause the air to fluoresce in the ultraviolet range of the spectrum. Using electron accelerators at the Idaho Accelerator Center, we are studying the production and transmission of Teller light in complex environments. This work is funded by the US Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA).
- Commercialization of photon activation analysis for trace element analysis. In this project, we are studying a number of applications of photon activation analysis. This is a technique which can detect a wide variety of elements at the ppm and ppb levels. Applications being explored include criminal forensics, mining, counterfeit drug detection, and scientific applications. This work is funded by the State of Idaho Higher Education Research Council (HERC).
